branchTrace.adoc, before:

[[BranchTrace]]
== Branch Trace

Instruction delta tracing, also known as branch tracing, works by
tracking execution from a known start address by sending information
about the deltas taken by the program. Deltas are typically introduced
by jump, call, return and branch type instructions, although interrupts
and exceptions are also types of deltas.

Instruction delta tracing provides an efficient encoding of an
instruction sequence by exploiting the deterministic way the processor
behaves based on the program it is executing.

The approach relies on an offline copy of the program binary being
available to the decoder, so it is generally unsuitable for either
dynamic (self-modifying) programs or those where access to the program
binary is prohibited.

While the program binary is sufficient, access to the assembly or
higher-level source code will improve the ability of the decoder to
present the decoded trace in the debugger by annotating the traced
instructions with source code line numbers and labels, variable names
etc.

This approach can be extended to cope with small sections of
deterministically dynamic code by arranging for the decoder to request
instruction memory from the target. Memory lookups generally lead to a
prohibitive reduction in performance, although they are suitable for
examining modest jump tables, such as the exception/interrupt vector
pointers of an operating system which may be adjusted at boot up and
when services are registered. Both static and dynamically linked
programs can be traced using this approach. Statically linked programs
are straightforward as they generally operate in a known address space,
often mapping directly to physical memory. Dynamically linked programs
require the debugger to keep track of memory allocation operations using
either trace or stop-mode debugging.

[[TraceConcepts]]
=== Instruction delta trace concepts

[[SequentialInstructions]]
==== Sequential instructions

For instruction set architectures such as RISC-V where all instructions
are executed unconditionally or at least their execution can be
determined based on the program binary, the instructions between the
deltas are assumed to be executed sequentially. Consequently, there is
no need to report them in the trace. The trace only needs to contain
whether branches were taken or not, the addresses of taken indirect
jumps, or other program counter discontinuities.

[[uninfpc]]
==== Uninferable PC discontinuities

An uninferable program counter discontinuity is a program counter change
that can not be inferred from the program binary alone. For these cases,
the instruction delta trace must include a destination address: the
address of the next valid instruction.

Indirect jumps are an example of this, where the next instruction
address is determined by the contents of a register rather than a
constant embedded in the program binary. In this case, the address of
the instruction following the jump (also known as the jump target) must
be traced.

Interrupts and exceptions are another form of uninferable PC
discontinuity; these are discussed in detail below.

==== Branches

A branch is an instruction where a jump is conditional on the value of a
register or a flag. For a decoder to able to follow program flow, the
trace must include whether a branch was taken or not.

For a direct branch, where the destination address is encoded in the
program binary (either as a constant, or as a constant offset from the
program counter), no further information is required. Direct branches
are the only type of branch that is supported by the RISC-V ISA.

[[interruptsexceptions]]
==== Interrupts and exceptions

Interrupts are a different type of delta that generally occur
asynchronously to the program's execution rather than intentionally as a
result of a specific instruction or event. Exceptions can be thought of
in the same way, even though they can be typically linked back to a
specific instruction address.

The decoder generally does not know where an interrupt occured in the
instruction sequence, so the trace must report the address where normal
program flow ceased, as well as give an indication of the asynchronous
destination which may be as simple as reporting the exception type. When
an interrupt or exception occurs, the final instruction retired
beforehand must be traced. Following this the next valid instruction
address (the first of the trap handler) must be traced.

Note: not all exceptions and interrupts cause traps (see
<<sec:terminology>> for definitions). Most
notably, floating point exceptions and disabled interrupts do not trap.
If an exception or interrupt doesn't trap, the program counter does not
change. So, there is no need to trace all exceptions/interrupts, just
traps. In this document, interrupts and exceptions are only traced when
they cause traps to be taken.

[[sec:synchronization]]
==== Synchronization

In order to make the trace robust there must be regular synchronization
points within the trace. Synchronization is accomplished by sending a
full valued instruction address (and potentially a context identifier).
The decoder and debugger may also benefit from sending the reason for
synchronizing. The frequency of synchronization is a trade-off between
robustness and trace bandwidth.

The instruction trace encoder needs to synchronise fully:

* For the first instruction traced after reset or resume from halt;
* Any time that an instruction is traced and the previous instruction
was not traced;
* If the instruction is the first of an interrupt service routine or
exception handler;
* After a prolonged period of time.

[[sec:endoftrace]]
==== End of trace

If tracing stops for any reason, the address of the final traced
instruction must be output.

Some examples of why tracing may stop are:

* The hart may be halted (entered debug mode);
* The hart may be reset;
* Encoding may be stopped (for example via a _Trace-off_ trigger - see
<<sec:trigger>>);
* The matching criteria for any filtering capabilities implemented by
the encoder may no longer be met;
* The encoder may be disabled.

[[optional]]
=== Optional and run-time configurable modes

An instruction trace encoder may support multiple tracing modes. To
ensure that the decoder treats the incoming packets correctly, it needs
to be informed of the current active configuration. The configuration is
reported by a packet that is issued by the encoder whenever the encoder
configuration is changed.

Here are common examples of such modes:

* delta address mode: program counter discontinuities are encoded as
differences instead of absolute address values.
* full address mode: program counter discontinuities are encoded as
absolute address values.
* implicit exception mode: the destination address of an exception (i.e.
the address of the exception trap) is assumed to be known by the
decoder, and thus not encoded in the trace.
* Sequentially inferable jump mode: The target of an indirect jump can
be inferred by considering the combined effect of two instructions.
* implicit return mode: the destination address of function call returns
is derived from a call stack, and thus not encoded in the trace.
* branch prediction mode: branches that are predicted correctly by an
encoder branch predictor (and an identical copy in the decoder) are not
encoded as taken/non-taken, but as a more efficient branch count number.
* Jump target cache mode: Rather than reporting the address of an
uninferable jump target, efficiency can be improved by caching recent
jump targets, and reporting the cache entry index instead.

Modes may have associated parameters; see <<tab:iparameters>> for further details.

All modes are optional apart from delta address mode, which must be
supported.

[[sec:delta-address]]
==== Delta address mode

Related parameters: None

In delta address mode, addresses are encoded as the difference between
the actual address of the current instruction and the actual address of
the instruction reported in the previous packet that contained an
address. This differential encoding requires fewer bits than the full
address, and thus results in more efficient trace compression.

[[sec:full-address]]
==== Full address mode

Related parameters: None

In full address mode, all addresses in the trace are encoded as absolute
addresses instead of in differential form. This kind of encoding is
always less efficient, but it can be a useful debugging aid for software
decoder developers.

[[sec:implicit-exception]]
==== Implicit exception mode

Related parameters: None

The RISC-V Privileged ISA specification stores exception handler base
addresses in the *_utvec/stvec/vstvec/mtvec_* CSR registers. In some
RISC-V implementations, the lower address bits are stored in the
*_ucause/scause/vscause/mcause_* CSR registers.

By default, both the *_*tvec_* and *_*cause_* values are reported when
an exception or interrupt occurs.

The implicit exception mode omits *_*tvec_* (the trap handler address),
from the trace and thus improves efficiency.

This mode can only be used if the decoder can infer the address of the
trap handler from just the exception cause.

[[sec:si-jump]]
==== Sequentially inferable jump mode

Related parameters: _sijump_p_.

By default, the target of an indirect jump is always considered an
uninferable PC discontinuity. However, if the register that specifies
the jump target was loaded with a constant then it can be considered
inferable under some circumstances. The hart must identify jumps with
sequentially inferable targets and provide this information separately
to the encoder. The final decision as to whether to treat the jump as
inferable or not must be made by the encoder. Both the constant load and
the jump must be traced in order for the decoder to be able to infer the
jump target. See <<JumpClasses>> for details
of what constitutes a sequentially inferable jump.

[[sec:implicit-return]]
==== Implicit return mode

Related parameters: _call_counter_size_p_, _return_stack_size_p_,
_itype_width_p_.

Although a function return is usually an indirect jump, well behaved
programs return to the point in the program from which the function was
called using a standard calling convention. For those programs, it is
possible to determine the execution path without being explicitly
notified of the destination address of the return. The implicit return
mode can result in very significant improvements in trace encoder
efficiency.

Returns can only be treated as inferable if the associated call has
already been reported in an earlier packet. The encoder must ensure that
this is the case. This can be accomplished by utilizing a counter to
keep track of the number of nested calls being traced. The counter
increments on calls (but not tail calls), and decrements on returns (see
<<JumpClasses>> for definitions). The counter
will not over or underflow, and is reset to 0 whenever a synchronization
packet is sent. Returns will be treated as inferable and will not
generate a trace packet if the count is non-zero (i.e. the associated
call was already reported in an earlier packet).

Such a scheme is low cost, and will work as long as programs are "well
behaved". The encoder does not check that the return address is actually
that of the instruction following the associated call. As such, any
program that modifies return addresses cannot be traced using this mode
with this minimal implementation.

Alternatively, the encoder can maintain a stack of expected return
addresses, and only treat a return as inferable if the actual return
address matches the prediction. This is fully robust for all programs,
but is more expensive to implement. In this case, if a return address
does not match the prediction, it must be reported explicitly via a
packet, along with the number of return addresses currently on the
stack. This ensures that the decoder can determine which return is being
reported.

[[sec:branch-prediction]]
==== Branch prediction mode

Related parameters: _bpred_size_p_.

Without branch prediction, the outcome of each executed branch is stored
in a branch map: a bit vector in which the taken/non-taken status of
each branch is stored in chronological order.

While this encoding is efficient, at 1 bit per branch, there are some
cases where this can still result in a relatively large volume of trace
packets. For example:

* Executing tight loops of code containing no uninferable jumps. Each
iteration of the loop will add a bit to the branch map;
* Sitting in an idle loop waiting for an interrupt. This produces large
amounts of trace when nothing of any interest is actually happening!
* Breakpoints, which in some implementations also spin in an idle loop.

A significant coding efficiency can be obtained by the addition of a
branch predictor in the encoder. To keep the encoder and decoder
synchronized, a predictor with identical behavior will need to be
implemented in the decoder software.

The predictor shall comprise a lookup table of 2^_bpred_size_p_^
entries. Each entry is indexed by bits _bpred_size_p_:1 of the
instruction address (or __bpred_size_p__+1:2 if compressed instructions
aren't supported), and each contains a 2-bit prediction state:

* 00: predict not taken, transition to 01 if prediction fails;
* 01: predict not taken, transition to 00 if prediction succeeds, else
11;
* 11: predict taken, transition to 10 if prediction fails;
* 10: predict taken, transition to 11 if prediction succeeds, else 00.

The MSB represents the predicted outcome, the LSB the most recent actual
outcome. The prediction must fail twice for the predicted value to
change.

The lookup table entries are initialized to 01 when a synchronization
packet is sent.

Other predictors, such as the gShare predictor (see Hennessy &
Patterson), should be considered. Some further experimentation is needed
to determine the benefits of different lookup table sizes and predictor
algorithms.

[[sec:jump-cache]]
==== Jump target cache mode

Related parameters: _cache_size_p_.

By default, the target address of an uninferable jump is output in the
trace, usually in differential form. If the same function is called
repeatedly, (for example, in a loop), the same address will be output
repeatedly.

An efficiency gain can be obtained by the addition of a jump target
cache to the encoder. To keep the encoder and decoder synchronized, a
cache with identical behavior will need to be implemented in the decoder
software. Even a small cache can provide significant improvement.

The cache shall comprise 2^_cache_size_p_^ entries, each of which can
contain an instruction address. It will be direct mapped, with each
entry indexed by bits _cache_size_p_:1 of the instruction address (or
__cache_size_p__+1:2 if compressed instructions aren't supported).

Each uninferable jump target is first compared with the entry at its
index in the cache. If it is found in the cache, the index number is
traced rather than the target address. If it is not found in the cache,
the entry at that index is replaced with the current instruction
address.

The cache entries are all invalidated when a synchronization packet is
sent.

Commit message:

Clarify which addresses are stored in the JTC - Issue 169

branchTrace.adoc, after:

[[BranchTrace]]
== Branch Trace

Instruction delta tracing, also known as branch tracing, works by
tracking execution from a known start address by sending information
about the deltas taken by the program. Deltas are typically introduced
by jump, call, return and branch type instructions, although interrupts
and exceptions are also types of deltas.

Instruction delta tracing provides an efficient encoding of an
instruction sequence by exploiting the deterministic way the processor
behaves based on the program it is executing.

The approach relies on an offline copy of the program binary being
available to the decoder, so it is generally unsuitable for either
dynamic (self-modifying) programs or those where access to the program
binary is prohibited.

While the program binary is sufficient, access to the assembly or
higher-level source code will improve the ability of the decoder to
present the decoded trace in the debugger by annotating the traced
instructions with source code line numbers and labels, variable names
etc.

This approach can be extended to cope with small sections of
deterministically dynamic code by arranging for the decoder to request
instruction memory from the target. Memory lookups generally lead to a
prohibitive reduction in performance, although they are suitable for
examining modest jump tables, such as the exception/interrupt vector
pointers of an operating system which may be adjusted at boot up and
when services are registered. Both static and dynamically linked
programs can be traced using this approach. Statically linked programs
are straightforward as they generally operate in a known address space,
often mapping directly to physical memory. Dynamically linked programs
require the debugger to keep track of memory allocation operations using
either trace or stop-mode debugging.

[[TraceConcepts]]
=== Instruction delta trace concepts

[[SequentialInstructions]]
==== Sequential instructions

For instruction set architectures such as RISC-V where all instructions
are executed unconditionally or at least their execution can be
determined based on the program binary, the instructions between the
deltas are assumed to be executed sequentially. Consequently, there is
no need to report them in the trace. The trace only needs to contain
whether branches were taken or not, the addresses of taken indirect
jumps, or other program counter discontinuities.

[[uninfpc]]
==== Uninferable PC discontinuities

An uninferable program counter discontinuity is a program counter change
that can not be inferred from the program binary alone. For these cases,
the instruction delta trace must include a destination address: the
address of the next valid instruction.

Indirect jumps are an example of this, where the next instruction
address is determined by the contents of a register rather than a
constant embedded in the program binary. In this case, the address of
the instruction following the jump (also known as the jump target) must
be traced.

Interrupts and exceptions are another form of uninferable PC
discontinuity; these are discussed in detail below.

==== Branches

A branch is an instruction where a jump is conditional on the value of a
register or a flag. For a decoder to able to follow program flow, the
trace must include whether a branch was taken or not.

For a direct branch, where the destination address is encoded in the
program binary (either as a constant, or as a constant offset from the
program counter), no further information is required. Direct branches
are the only type of branch that is supported by the RISC-V ISA.

[[interruptsexceptions]]
==== Interrupts and exceptions

Interrupts are a different type of delta that generally occur
asynchronously to the program's execution rather than intentionally as a
result of a specific instruction or event. Exceptions can be thought of
in the same way, even though they can be typically linked back to a
specific instruction address.

The decoder generally does not know where an interrupt occured in the
instruction sequence, so the trace must report the address where normal
program flow ceased, as well as give an indication of the asynchronous
destination which may be as simple as reporting the exception type. When
an interrupt or exception occurs, the final instruction retired
beforehand must be traced. Following this the next valid instruction
address (the first of the trap handler) must be traced.

Note: not all exceptions and interrupts cause traps (see
<<sec:terminology>> for definitions). Most
notably, floating point exceptions and disabled interrupts do not trap.
If an exception or interrupt doesn't trap, the program counter does not
change. So, there is no need to trace all exceptions/interrupts, just
traps. In this document, interrupts and exceptions are only traced when
they cause traps to be taken.

[[sec:synchronization]]
==== Synchronization

In order to make the trace robust there must be regular synchronization
points within the trace. Synchronization is accomplished by sending a
full valued instruction address (and potentially a context identifier).
The decoder and debugger may also benefit from sending the reason for
synchronizing. The frequency of synchronization is a trade-off between
robustness and trace bandwidth.

The instruction trace encoder needs to synchronise fully:

* For the first instruction traced after reset or resume from halt;
* Any time that an instruction is traced and the previous instruction
was not traced;
* If the instruction is the first of an interrupt service routine or
exception handler;
* After a prolonged period of time.

[[sec:endoftrace]]
==== End of trace

If tracing stops for any reason, the address of the final traced
instruction must be output.

Some examples of why tracing may stop are:

* The hart may be halted (entered debug mode);
* The hart may be reset;
* Encoding may be stopped (for example via a _Trace-off_ trigger - see
<<sec:trigger>>);
* The matching criteria for any filtering capabilities implemented by
the encoder may no longer be met;
* The encoder may be disabled.

[[optional]]
=== Optional and run-time configurable modes

An instruction trace encoder may support multiple tracing modes. To
ensure that the decoder treats the incoming packets correctly, it needs
to be informed of the current active configuration. The configuration is
reported by a packet that is issued by the encoder whenever the encoder
configuration is changed.

Here are common examples of such modes:

* delta address mode: program counter discontinuities are encoded as
differences instead of absolute address values.
* full address mode: program counter discontinuities are encoded as
absolute address values.
* implicit exception mode: the destination address of an exception (i.e.
the address of the exception trap) is assumed to be known by the
decoder, and thus not encoded in the trace.
* Sequentially inferable jump mode: The target of an indirect jump can
be inferred by considering the combined effect of two instructions.
* implicit return mode: the destination address of function call returns
is derived from a call stack, and thus not encoded in the trace.
* branch prediction mode: branches that are predicted correctly by an
encoder branch predictor (and an identical copy in the decoder) are not
encoded as taken/non-taken, but as a more efficient branch count number.
* Jump target cache mode: Rather than reporting the address of an
uninferable jump target, efficiency can be improved by caching recent
jump targets, and reporting the cache entry index instead.

Modes may have associated parameters; see <<tab:iparameters>> for further details.

All modes are optional apart from delta address mode, which must be
supported.

[[sec:delta-address]]
==== Delta address mode

Related parameters: None

In delta address mode, addresses are encoded as the difference between
the actual address of the current instruction and the actual address of
the instruction reported in the previous packet that contained an
address. This differential encoding requires fewer bits than the full
address, and thus results in more efficient trace compression.

[[sec:full-address]]
==== Full address mode

Related parameters: None

In full address mode, all addresses in the trace are encoded as absolute
addresses instead of in differential form. This kind of encoding is
always less efficient, but it can be a useful debugging aid for software
decoder developers.

[[sec:implicit-exception]]
==== Implicit exception mode

Related parameters: None

The RISC-V Privileged ISA specification stores exception handler base
addresses in the *_utvec/stvec/vstvec/mtvec_* CSR registers. In some
RISC-V implementations, the lower address bits are stored in the
*_ucause/scause/vscause/mcause_* CSR registers.

By default, both the *_*tvec_* and *_*cause_* values are reported when
an exception or interrupt occurs.

The implicit exception mode omits *_*tvec_* (the trap handler address),
from the trace and thus improves efficiency.

This mode can only be used if the decoder can infer the address of the
trap handler from just the exception cause.

[[sec:si-jump]]
==== Sequentially inferable jump mode

Related parameters: _sijump_p_.

By default, the target of an indirect jump is always considered an
uninferable PC discontinuity. However, if the register that specifies
the jump target was loaded with a constant then it can be considered
inferable under some circumstances. The hart must identify jumps with
sequentially inferable targets and provide this information separately
to the encoder. The final decision as to whether to treat the jump as
inferable or not must be made by the encoder. Both the constant load and
the jump must be traced in order for the decoder to be able to infer the
jump target. See <<JumpClasses>> for details
of what constitutes a sequentially inferable jump.

[[sec:implicit-return]]
==== Implicit return mode

Related parameters: _call_counter_size_p_, _return_stack_size_p_,
_itype_width_p_.

Although a function return is usually an indirect jump, well behaved
programs return to the point in the program from which the function was
called using a standard calling convention. For those programs, it is
possible to determine the execution path without being explicitly
notified of the destination address of the return. The implicit return
mode can result in very significant improvements in trace encoder
efficiency.

Returns can only be treated as inferable if the associated call has
already been reported in an earlier packet. The encoder must ensure that
this is the case. This can be accomplished by utilizing a counter to
keep track of the number of nested calls being traced. The counter
increments on calls (but not tail calls), and decrements on returns (see
<<JumpClasses>> for definitions). The counter
will not over or underflow, and is reset to 0 whenever a synchronization
packet is sent. Returns will be treated as inferable and will not
generate a trace packet if the count is non-zero (i.e. the associated
call was already reported in an earlier packet).

Such a scheme is low cost, and will work as long as programs are "well
behaved". The encoder does not check that the return address is actually
that of the instruction following the associated call. As such, any
program that modifies return addresses cannot be traced using this mode
with this minimal implementation.

Alternatively, the encoder can maintain a stack of expected return
addresses, and only treat a return as inferable if the actual return
address matches the prediction. This is fully robust for all programs,
but is more expensive to implement. In this case, if a return address
does not match the prediction, it must be reported explicitly via a
packet, along with the number of return addresses currently on the
stack. This ensures that the decoder can determine which return is being
reported.

[[sec:branch-prediction]]
==== Branch prediction mode

Related parameters: _bpred_size_p_.

Without branch prediction, the outcome of each executed branch is stored
in a branch map: a bit vector in which the taken/non-taken status of
each branch is stored in chronological order.

While this encoding is efficient, at 1 bit per branch, there are some
cases where this can still result in a relatively large volume of trace
packets. For example:

* Executing tight loops of code containing no uninferable jumps. Each
iteration of the loop will add a bit to the branch map;
* Sitting in an idle loop waiting for an interrupt. This produces large
amounts of trace when nothing of any interest is actually happening!
* Breakpoints, which in some implementations also spin in an idle loop.

A significant coding efficiency can be obtained by the addition of a
branch predictor in the encoder. To keep the encoder and decoder
synchronized, a predictor with identical behavior will need to be
implemented in the decoder software.

The predictor shall comprise a lookup table of 2^_bpred_size_p_^
entries. Each entry is indexed by bits _bpred_size_p_:1 of the
instruction address (or __bpred_size_p__+1:2 if compressed instructions
aren't supported), and each contains a 2-bit prediction state:

* 00: predict not taken, transition to 01 if prediction fails;
* 01: predict not taken, transition to 00 if prediction succeeds, else
11;
* 11: predict taken, transition to 10 if prediction fails;
* 10: predict taken, transition to 11 if prediction succeeds, else 00.

The MSB represents the predicted outcome, the LSB the most recent actual
outcome. The prediction must fail twice for the predicted value to
change.

The lookup table entries are initialized to 01 when a synchronization
packet is sent.

Other predictors, such as the gShare predictor (see Hennessy &
Patterson), should be considered. Some further experimentation is needed
to determine the benefits of different lookup table sizes and predictor
algorithms.

[[sec:jump-cache]]
==== Jump target cache mode

Related parameters: _cache_size_p_.

By default, the target address of an uninferable jump is output in the
trace, usually in differential form. If the same function is called
repeatedly, (for example, in a loop), the same address will be output
repeatedly.

An efficiency gain can be obtained by the addition of a jump target
cache to the encoder. To keep the encoder and decoder synchronized, a
cache with identical behavior will need to be implemented in the decoder
software. Even a small cache can provide significant improvement.

The cache shall comprise 2^_cache_size_p_^ entries, each of which can
contain an instruction address.  The addresses stored in the cache are 
the targets of uninferable jumps.  It will be direct mapped, with each
entry indexed by bits _cache_size_p_:1 of the instruction address (or
__cache_size_p__+1:2 if compressed instructions aren't supported).

Each uninferable jump target is first compared with the entry at its
index in the cache. If it is found in the cache, the index number is
traced rather than the target address. If it is not found in the cache,
the entry at that index is replaced with the current instruction
address.

The cache entries are all invalidated when a synchronization packet is
sent.
