[[ch:timestamping]]
== Timestamping

The support for Timestamps is optional and so the contents of this
chapter are informative only.

In many systems it is desirable to periodically insert a timestamp
packet into the trace stream, effectively marking that point in the
stream with a time value.

This can be used to judge "time" between various points in the trace
stream and, more notably, to be able to correlate trace streams from
different harts (i.e. this point in hart A's stream occurred at roughly
the same time as that point in hart B's trace stream). The former helps
one to judge performance of sections of code execution (to the
granularity of timestamp insertion). The latter helps debugging
multi-hart MP problems.

An implementation may have the following:

* A timestamp is (up to) a 64-bit time value.
* Configurable options for generating timestamp values such as a hart's
'time' values or 'cycle' values.
* Options could may also include things like taking 'time' values with
the low 4 or 8 bits dropped off which would create a coarser granularity
time values
* Timestamp generation may be enabled or disabled. If enabled, a
timestamp packet would be generated periodically which may be based on
configurable interval or rate, e.g. once every 2^n^ items where 'n' and
'items' are configurable among some limited set of choices. The choices
could be:
** Time
** Time scaled down. An implementation specific scaled or divided down
derivative of time. This may be useful in providing a smaller coarser
graularity values
** Time Interpolated up. An implementation specific interpolated up
derivative of time. This may be useful in providing higher resolution
time values
** Cycle
** Implementation specific
* A timestamp packet may also be generated in conjunction with a sync
packet
* Timestamp packets are highly compressible and variable in size
depending on the number of low bits of the current value that have
changed wrt the last emitted timestamp value. If timestamp packets are
emitted rarely (but not as rare as sync packets), then they will tend to
be, say, 2-4 bytes in size (still much less than the full up to 64-bit
size). If timestamp packets are emitted somewhat frequently, then they
will tend to be 1-2 bytes in size. If timestamp packets are emitted very
frequently, then they will tend to be <1 byte in size. Timestamp values
associated with sync packets would always be the full implemented size.

